---
title: Hope and the Burden of a Heart
---

_A heart's a heavy burden._  

My partner and I both love Studio Ghibli movies, and one we've watched at least a couple times (I'm pretty sure just two) is Howl's Moving Castle. Review to be delivered later. The quote that stands out to me the most every time is the one at the top of the article - A heart's a heavy burden. It's bitingly true - caring and hoping all the time is exhausting, especially now when things feel oppressive in our political climate. It's dramatic, but it feels like the bad guys are winning, and it's overwhelming to try and keep track of and take action on everything that's happening. What do we do?  

I heard about a concept recently from a really great video essay called [State of The Dead Internet](https://youtu.be/GELgKl_Wow8?si=hL8hh6AsNCrgIvJf) by a youtuber named Jules. I highly recommend watching it. It's a tactic used by the Russians in the Cold War and by various other powers across time called "demoralization". Aside from the general connotation of the word, it's also a tactic in which a force uses overwhelming propaganda and assailment of various kinds to eat away at the morale of another group. There is not a war going on in America, not in any traditional sense. But this tactic is still alive and well with larger tech companies and the news, where we are bombarded with the world's evils and difficulties.  

This has made it hard to focus on the good things of the world. I would like to think of myself as a boundless optimist - even in times like these, I believe the goodness of humanity will prevail. But when all you see is suffering, it gets a lot harder to see that belief as well. When you're demoralized, you can't take action. You can't make meaningful efforts to change the world. I feel like I've very quickly become demoralized, especially in the face of my personal white whale that is AI. It is something that feels deeply wrong to me, something that eats away at my own creativity and humanity. I can't stand it.  

That question at the top still stands: what do we do? Honestly, I'm not sure. There is no perfect solution for this question. I can only hazard a guess at what will work. We need to slow down, to take time to breathe. The world's problems will not be solved in a day by a single person. It will take a lot of time, and whenever such a long project presents itself rest is just as important as action. We need to take time to take care of ourselves, to reflect and plan and care for each other in intimate ways. The second step is working in small ways. If the millions of people that do care all take small actions, it will together be louder than anything one can achieve. Find ways to support community outreach efforts. Donate where you can. Speak out when individuals around you are saying hateful things. Above all, do not do by yourself. A heart's a heavy burden - so don't carry it alone.