---
title: Identity, Perception, and Dehumanization
---

This has been an extremely difficult thing to write. I've gone through a lot of different drafts focusing on a lot of different aspects or perspectives on these topics, but they are deeply elusive. It's probably been the most sittings I've ever put into one individual thing of this length. But a few recent experiences have begun to tie these things together in a way that I think makes sense and conveys my point properly. To get there though, we have to start by addressing the three pillars that define what I want to say.

Firstly, identity. Identity has been a lot of things over the years, at least for me - philosophical identity in trying to find a cohesive worldview, moral identity in attempting to figure out what is right and wrong, and most pressingly for this article, gender identity. Secondly, perception. The act of being seen. Of being judged and calculated. It's something that bothers me a lot. Finally, dehumanization. Removing the humanity from a person, usually with a specific goal in mind. A concept I am all too familiar with personally due to the last month or so.  

The main realization and the main thing that I have been grappling with recently is the idea that perception is deeply tied to identity, especially gender identity. I don't quite know how else to sum it up, but it's a little more complex than it seems on the surface. Of course we have the social contract and the classic trans concept of passing, but the perception of others has (in some part) the ability to determine who we are, at least in a public space. Allow me to explain further.  

Nobody else decides who we are as a person, in any aspect. Even if outside pressures force us to look or act a certain way, even if who we want to be is pressed under layers and layers of life's difficulties, we are at our core the person we choose to be. (This is in reference to personal identity, not morality. That's a separate article.) The second we step that idea of ourselves out into the world, we are immediately presented with perception. We are known to other people - our family and friends, the strangers we interact with, the acquaintances we interact with, etc. At that point, how we choose to express ourselves suddenly becomes "everybody else's problem", even when it shouldn't be. Suddenly, people whose opinions we do not respect or who do not respect us can choose something about us. They can decide something negative about us and choose to enforce that. Their perception suddenly allows them to deny some aspect of ourselves; in turn, this allows us to be denied some aspect of personhood, especially in regards to gender identity.    

That is the heart of what I have struggled with: other people have the ability to deny and demean my existence. For a good part of the time while struggling with this, I did not know what to do about it. It is a dismal thing to have your sense of self pushed underwater and held there by people who despise you. Recently, though, I watched a video essay by the ever-talented Lily Alexandre called [Notes on Vanishing](https://youtu.be/cqhiup5qSY8?si=r59zKG8YUaawCtdz), which struggles with a lot of the same things I have been struggling with. I think it has led me towards a solution: calm, safe visibility. Not vanishing, not hiding, but continuing to assert who I am no matter what people want to choose to think of me. Not necessarily being in your face about it, but not letting people push your head underwater. As the seminal Captain America quote says, "Doesn't matter what the press says. Doesn't matter what the politicians or the mobs say. Doesn't matter if the whole country decides something wrong is something right... When the mob and the press and the whole world tell you to move, your job is to plant yourself like a tree beside the river of truth, and tell the whole world -'No, you move'."  