---
title: Instability & Helplessness
---

Like a lot of my "philosophical" articles recently, this is becoming more of a journaling process surrounding specific themes and ideas. This one is one that has plagued me for a lot of my developmental life: instability.  

I have become further and further convinced that social media has had an inexorable impact on modern life, including my own, that we have yet to fully, deeply unpack. See my very recent article about law to hear more on how this concept works legally. But I think in a more personal sense, it's really fucked with me. Social media's bias of perspective is often talked about in regards to body dysmorphia and appearance for younger women - that the people on Instagram and whatnot use so much _kayfabe_ and that this content is pushed so hard that it often feels like reality. For me, especially looking back, I feel I was influenced pretty heavily by that sort of stuff too, in a different way. On social media I saw the perfectly articulate, the ultimately composed, the people who present these crazy finished products and stunning arguments and put-together lives and measured myself against them constantly. I have only recently been dealing with the emotional fallout (for lack of a better term) of being diagnosed with both ADHD and Bipolar, and how that has really fucked with a lot of my life. It's made it really difficult in the past to be creative, to have a sense of order in my life, and to feel smart, even. On all accounts, I should be a stellar example of this sort of thing. Straight A student. Strong presence in all face-forward academic and creative fields I apply myself to. But I still feel like a fraud for all the days spent playing video games and watching Youtube and waiting for some magical moment to try and realign myself only to fall short consistently. The fact that I cannot match these perfectly-curated lives has always eaten at me.  

This brings a sense of instability all its own - my life feels unstable despite the fact that it _is stable_. I have a wonderful girlfriend, a prosperous future in teaching ahead of me, many close friends, a strong sense of what I love and want to do, but it feels unstable. _I_ feel unstable. I feel as though I might tip one wrong domino and suddenly it's all gone. The intense, crippling paranoia the last month has brought, and the trials and tribulations that it brought have not helped. It nags at me that I should be more composed than this, that I should be writing and reading and philosophizing and just being "productive" every day, consistently. To have that curated life, to live up to the perfect image I have crafted. I know it's not real, but still.  

I feel like I'm trying to juggle, and as soon as I get one piece in the air another falls out of my hands. I bend to pick it up, but as I do more fall. I can hold a few at a time, make it seem like I'm balanced, but I have so much I want to do and not nearly enough juggling to do it all. It feels like it should be simple - I hear it all the time. "Just 30 minutes a day!" "You have to just do it, and it'll become a habit!" I look to my idols, the people who do present this air of intellectual prowess, and I can't help but compare it to my own disorganized chaos. Especially when I fuck up, and fuck up bad enough that I am reminded everywhere I look of it. My diagnoses have helped in coming to terms with a lot of my past mistakes, adding the context of those major difficulties to them. It doesn't make it ok, but it helps me forgive myself easier. But my recent past is still constantly catching up to me. It makes me feel as though I will never be as good as those people I adore, even more so than usual. I struggle to give myself the grace to struggle. I feel unstable which causes me more instability. My chaos makes me feel as though that is my only natural state. I want to find a balance between the unrealistic desire to fulfill all my dreams in a day and the untenable lows of disorder. It is the same swing as mania and depression, but expressed on a different plane. My medication has helped me find a balance in day-to-day life, but in these moments of panic and fear, I still feel helpless to manage myself as I see fit. Am I truly progressing towards stability if I fall apart like this? I should give myself more grace, more kindness, but that is deeply difficult when my heart leaps into my throat at the mention of police, or of crime, or when something regarding those incidents pops up again, and I find myself frozen in the headlights of that chaos. Perhaps stability lies somewhere past it, or somewhere in the center of all of the noise where I'm magically able to fix things. Maybe I just need therapy to work through all of this. Who knows. Thanks for listening.