---
title: Powwows, Educational Tunnel Vision, and an Effort to Rethink
---

I attended a powwow today. I'm not saying this as a "I'm not like the other white people" sort of thing. I'm saying it, and writing this article about it, because the school system failed me hard and I want to talk about my experience there and how it made me think about activism and education.  

Education matters to me a lot. I mean, I'm in school for teaching right now because I think it's important to have kids learn about critical thinking and how to know what an author is saying, how to distinguish AI from humanity, how to recognize and combat misinformation. So I have a vested interest in education being full and robust, and enabling a student to analyze what they have seen and heard.  

The powwow was being held in an arena just off campus, which I walked to in the comforting rain. When I had finally gotten past security via stashing my bag in a bush because I didn't know about a clear bag policy, I was greeted by a circle of vendors around the whole arena and the traditional drum circle positioned in the center where a basketball court would be. I made my way around and observed what everyone was selling before taking my seat for the cedaring and opening prayer.   

To be honest, throughout the whole process, I was a little uncomfortable. For what was unfortunately one of the first times ever, I was the odd person out culturally (which, for the record, should happen more to white people like me). I had never learned about Indigenous tradition, and my research beforehand yielded little result due to the diversity of traditions involved in a powwow. I didn't want to make a misstep and insult the culture I had been graciously invited to participate in by an acquaintance/friend of mine.  

The ceremony that I got to see was beautiful. The prayers focused on the beauty of creation, and invited everybody in, even me as a total outsider. It felt like a different version of Catholicism, the religion of my childhood that promised everybody shelter but made me feel excluded for my identity. The Gourd Dance, which was the only full dance I was able to see, was a work of art and spirituality I had never considered before. Almost 20 minutes of precise drum work, singing, and movement from the 40ish people who participated, not simply technically impressive but beautiful. Without words, it communicated a different sense of worship I have never personally been privy to. I am sad and slightly ashamed I did not know more about this before today.  

For my entire primary and secondary education, I attended a Catholic school. There, the indigenous peoples of America were a footnote. We discussed them briefly, but only as a people tortured and destroyed by the Spanish colonizers. We never touched on what made them unique, their culture and vibrancy. We were never given a chance to discuss it or even reflect on why we didn't discuss it. My thinking was narrowed by the system. I wish I had been more curious, more eager to look outside my little bubble in more ways than just my gender identiy. I was never really given the tools to do that, though. It is only now that I am learning how to investigate and dig into assumptions I previously held. I am learning to hold to account a system that made me complicit in things I never realized were wrong. For instance, in the 7th grade, we were dragged to our state capital for "School Choice Day." I just went along and wore the silly scarf I was given. I never stopped to consider until _this semester_ about its implications as a tool for modern day segregation.  

This will be a long task. That's ok, though. Everyone starts somewhere. I want to be able to be an advocate and an active participant in things like this. I want to understand how the powwow works, to learn why Ramadan is practiced, to know about how to make a place disability friendly and what I can do to protect women and AFAB people in my life. I want to pass this knowledge on, to use my place as a teacher to break this cycle of tunnel vision that schools want us to have.  

I think we should all be doing this, frankly, but that's as lukewarm of a take as is humanly possible. This entire article is. That's what basically everyone marginalized says, including me in regards to LGBTQ issues. From the standpoint of new thinking, this isn't it. But it's important for me to say it, at least to me. It's an acknowledgement to myself that I want to uphold my ideals of the beauty of the world and the importance of the people in it. It's a way to remind me, despite all the difficulty of life right now, that what I believe and what I want to accomplish matters.  

The friend/acquaintance that invited me to the powwow also invited me to join my school's American Indian Student Association, and I'm going to take them up on that.  