---
title: Social Media, The Out Group, and the Dispersion of Surveillance
---

Recently, there's been a lot of news about [university students](https://apnews.com/article/international-student-f1-visa-revoked-college-f12320b435b6bf9cf723f1e8eb8c67ae) [having their](https://www.cnn.com/2025/04/16/us/international-visa-revocations-traffic-stops/index.html) [visas revoked](https://www.oudaily.com/news/ou-oklahoma-state-university-osu-uco-ocu-international-student-visas-trump-immigration-revoked-terminated-protest/article_5e837c69-8ced-4a60-8eac-39af056cc144.html). This is coming as a part of an already existing wave of ICE crackdowns and other threats to the safety and well-being of anyone that the current administration wants to think isn't "American". I could go on for a long time about the history of immigration and the whole "melting pot" and Ellis Island and the whole nine yards about America being built on the backs of immigrants (which, don't get me wrong, is all entirely true). However, something else about this case has stood out to me.    

It's mentioned in one of the articles above, but one of the alleged reasons that students' visas are being revoked is them _being politically active_. Protests, social media posts, anything that is promoting political ideas that the current administration doesn't particularly agree with (including, I've heard anecdotally, protests of the ongoing Palestinian genocide). This is fascinating to me, not simply because of how damn racist it is (they haven't attempted to kick out white people for protesting these same things), but because of the way these issues have been impacted by the internet. It's a modern-age escalation of one of the oldest tactics of fascism, and it's a development that it's important to recognize and keep an eye on.    

To explain my reasoning here, a short discussion about fascism, especially on the internet, is required. One of the fourteen key traits of fascism, as defined by Lawrence Britt's "Fascism Anyone?" (and purportedly supported by the National Holocaust Museum) is "identification of enemies/scape-goats as a unifying cause". Basically, fascism requires an out group. There has to be someone to point the finger at and say "That's what's wrong with this country! Get rid of that!" Initially, this was done primarily by people in power - see the Nazi regime disseminating the idea of Jewish people as the root issue of why Germany was floundering. However, with the growth of the social media age, as many other things have, _the people now have the power to do this too._ The common man can point to a person and proclaim them part of the "out group" and tell others that efficaciously. This is not to say larger demagogues have no influence - they certainly do, they give speeches and rallies across the country. However, many of them were otherwise normal people before they became major political figures - see people like Riley Gaines, and Kyle Rittenhouse, who made a big splash on the news or social media and used that as a platform to leap into becoming conservative sweethearts.  

So how does all of this tie into the student visa revocations? Firstly, of course, the government has decided on an out group. Right now, that includes people of color, LGBTQ people, and most non traditionally normative folks. With social media, the general public has the ability to single out and bring light to people in that out group. If someone talks about their political beliefs on social media, that can and apparently has been used against them. If they show up to protests and are identified and put on social media, they can lose rights. It's the concept of the surveillance state passed down to the people.  

There is a significant counter-argument to this, though - what makes this different from conservatives posted to liberal social media? There have been tons of viral videos depicting conservative voices lashing out that have lead to negative results for them - lost jobs, ruined reputations, etc. What makes this any different? My mind wanders to a discussion that we've been having in my philosophy course about civil disobedience. It comes down to power. Conservative voices, usually proposed by the in group or those directly adjacent to them, are the dominant voices. Even when there are major groups of left-leaning thoughts or movements, the conservative voices are still the ones in power. It's not like transgender rights or LGBTQ acceptance are swinging back and forth between electoral cycles - no matter who's in power, LGBTQ people are still not fully accepted. Racism is still alive and well. Conservative voices and powers advocate for violence on social media. I have personally had threats made against me by conservatives due to a video of me on social media. Of course, no political group is entirely coherent. But when conservative people make controversy, I see that people want them to be deplatformed and put through the legal system. When I see liberal people make controversy, I see that people want them hurt. This is absolutely an important distinction to make. The students who are having their visas revoked have not caused harm. They have used their voices in the same way the rest of us have, and, though not physical in this case, significant harm is being threatened against them for it.

What does that mean for us? Firstly, it means that safety should be more of a priority when taking political action than ever before. Because of the ease of identification, taking any political action should be carefully chosen and kept to yourself. As the common saying goes, "Shut the fuck up." That's the pincer here - it's more dangerous than ever to take action and yet more important than ever. Either way, my international friends are scared. I talked to one today who has been exhausted from running around and missing classes to deliver documentation and get answers to whether she'll be coming back in the fall. Another friend discussed the fear that has been rippling through her friends regarding their visas. There's no turning back from the way social media has impacted the concept of the "out group". It's therefore our job to attempt to find a way forward despite it.